---
 id: 1
 title: "A Booking System"
 category: code
 type: problem
 backgroundColor: "#303952"
 published: "2021-04-01T12:00:00Z"
 description: "This problem was asked by Snapchat. Given an array of time intervals (start, end) for classroom lectures (possibly overlapping), find the minimum number of rooms required. For example, given [(30, 75), (0, 50), (60, 150)], you should return 2."
---

## Assumptions and Tests

To solve this problem, let's first create a few test conditions that we can use to make sure our solution works. First things first, if there are no intervals provided, we should return that zero rooms are required. Secondly, we should verify that we can support two and three different room requirement conditions, such as:

```python
[(30, 75), (0, 50), (60, 150)]
```

Should return 2 rooms needed.

```python
[(0, 15), (10, 15), (5, 15)]
```

Should return that 3 rooms are needed.

Lastly, we're making the assumption that for a configuration with *instantaneous* intervals, such as:

```python
[(0,0), (1,1), (2,2)]
```

Should return 3 rooms required, in other words, if a room is used from 12:11PM to 12:11PM, I'm assuming that the fact that an interval exists, implies that the room is used for less than a minute but still more than a zero time interval.

## Solution 1 (Trivial and non-performant)

My first thoughts when considering solving this problem is to create a matrix of discrete single time interval periods. Meaning, three arrays of dimensions `[min(time), max(time)]` which would look like:

```python
[[0,0,0,0,0...1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1...0,0,0,0], [0,0,0,0,0...1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1...0,0,0,0], [0,0,0,0,0...1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1...0,0,0,0]]
```

With each 0 or 1 representing whether a room is used at a particular time interval. Then, you can do a sum of each of the three arrays for each index, using either a loop or matrix operation in Python to create a single array that looks like:

```python
[[[0,0,0,0,0...1,2,3,3,3,3,1,1...0,0,0,0]]]
```

The solution to the problem would therefore be the maximum value in that final array, which would be 3.

## Solution 2

This solution uses a similar approach to **Solution 1**, except instead of having discrete time, we use change-over events as a way to work out the number of rooms required.

We can frame this problem with lecturers moving in and out of a school, with each each lecturer requiring their own room. Everytime a lecture starts, a lecturer goes into their own room, and everytime a lecture leaves they leave their room.

Let's store the bookings in a dictionary, like so:

```python
# Store the bookings at each time 
    bookings = {}
```

So, let's run over each interval, and assign a 1 for someone entering or a -1 for someone leaving to each start and end time. If there are collisions, such as two meetings starting or ending at the same time, we check to make sure the value exists already and increment or decrement as necessary; otherwise we just assign it to be the default value of 1 for entry and -1 for exit.

```python
# Create the entry and exit values, and if there are duplicates, add another to that time interval
    for interval in intervals:
        bookings[interval[0]] = bookings[interval[0]] + 1 if interval[0] in intervals else 1 
        bookings[interval[1]] = bookings[interval[1]] - 1 if interval[1] in intervals else -1  
```

With this, by watching as time progress between each class, we can work out at each change-over, how many lecturers are present at one instant in time. So let's sort the bookings into time series so we can move through time and monitor the flow of lecturers.

```python
# Arrange time in order so we can progress through time and watch the event
    time = sorted(bookings.items())
```

Lastly, we can loop through time and add the number of rooms to the number of lecturers at one moment, for each interval, someone will either leave or enter so the number of rooms needed will change over time. We should have 0 rooms at the start and end of the program.

```python
# Store the rooms required (return value)
    required = 0
    # Store the rooms being used at this time interval
    rooms = 0
    # Loop through each time interval
    for time, event in time:
        # Add the entry/exit value for movement 
        rooms += event
        # If the rooms exceeds the required number at any one time, assign it
        if rooms > required: required = rooms 
```

This solution will complete in approximately O(n.log(n)) due to the sorting function being used for the dictionary. The solution and test file is available [here](https://github.com/designedbyjosh/daily-coding-problem/tree/master/solutions/1).

This solution was aided by [this discussion](https://gist.github.com/folksilva/46a756979a4b4cedc841fbeb3193f181).