---
 id: 2
 title: "Performant Binary Logic"
 category: code
 type: problem
 backgroundColor: "#303952"
 published: "2021-04-09T12:00:00Z"
 description: "This problem was asked by Facebook. Given three 32-bit integers x, y, and b, return x if b is 1 and y if b is 0, using only mathematical or bit operations. You can assume b can only be 1 or 0."
---

## Assumptions and Tests

To solve this problem, we need to break down and clarify what the limits of the question are.

We know that b can only be 1 or 0, which means we can have some form of toggle to switch between x and y.

## Solution 1 (Using illegal operation)

My first thoughts are, well, without any mathemtical or bit operations, we just use an if statement that uses the value of b to determine what is returned. Simple, right?

```python
    def solve(x, y, b):
        return x if b is 1 else y
```

This is a super straightforward solution, but doesn't meet the requirements of the question that are to use only mathematical and logic operations. Furthermore, there's no limitations on the solution that define whether b is not 1 or 0, and it's something else - this is an assumption that we're taking advantage of here.

## Solution 2

Using only mathematical or bit operations means we are limited to using functions such as:
- AND (&)
- OR (|)
- XOR (^)
- NOT (~)
- LEFTSHIFT (<<)
- RIGHTSHIFT (>>)

To create the solution, we create a bit mask. This stems from storing signed integers in Two's Complement, which is a very typical method of storing numbers on most computer architectures. Two's Complement stores the negative of a number by inverting the bits, and adding 1.

For simplicity sake, let's demonstrate this problem using 8-bit integer logic.

```
-2 = 0x1111110
-1 = 0x1111111
0 = 0x00000000
1 = 0x00000001
2 = 0x00000010
```

As you can see, when you have 0 and -1, you have a bit-mask which consists of entirely ones or entirely zeros. Then, you can combine your bit mask with the target number to determine if it should be returned or not. For instance, by AND'ing the number 2 and b=0, we get:

```
0x00000010 & 0x00000000 = 0x00000000
```

Then, if we AND'ed the opposite for b=1, we'd need:

```
0x000000010 & 0x11111111 = 0x00000010
```

So, what we can see here, is that we need b to be -1 or 0. As such, at the beginning of our application, we should set b to be negative itself, since -0 = 0 and 1 becomes -1. Which means we will have:

```
-1 = 0x11111111
0 = 0x00000000
```

Which are our bit-masks which are assigned to the variable b. The negation acts as a converter from `0x00000001` which is not a bit mask to `0x11111111` which can be a bit-mask. From here, we can then use the OR operator between b and NOT b, which will determine what whether x or y is returned since the OR operator will return 1 if one or both are true. Since we've applied the bit-mask, only one of x or y remains after being applied to the bit-mask, so the correct value is returned. Our final program will look like:

```
b = -b;
return (x & b) | (y & ~b)
```


The solution and test file is available [here](https://github.com/designedbyjosh/daily-coding-problem/tree/master/solutions/2).